---
layout: post
title:  "Hello World!"
date:   2024-12-14 10:42:58 +0000
---

> "This is the time, and this is the record of the time."  
> — [Laurie Anderson, *From the Air* (1982)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_Science_(Laurie_Anderson_album))

> "All those moments will be lost in time, like tears... in... rain."  
> — [Roy Batty, *Blade Runner* (1982)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tears_in_rain_monologue)

> "All moments, past, present, and future, always have existed, always will exist."  
> — [Kurt Vonnegut, *Slaughterhouse-Five* (1969)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slaughterhouse-Five)


**This is an idea that I've been working on, one way or another, for about 14 years.** It may be more than that, but either way *that's a long bloody time*.

I originally came up with it when I was working at the BBC website, and I gradually got a few people there properly interested in it. Long story short, it never happened... and I think, when I explain what it is, you'll see why. I think it was probably just a bit too big and square-peg-round-hole, and the BBC was really focussed on other things (like iPlayer) at the time. Anyway.

Now, a few of the necessary stars are aligned to let me try to do it myself. I have more time now that my small humans are older, and the invention of ChatGPT means I have access to the coding wisdom that I need to get the basics off the ground.

Disclaimer: I'm a bit of a generalist/master-of-none type, so I'm likely to get lots of things badly wrong as I try to get this working. But this isn't about getting it *all right*, it's about getting *enough* of it right *enough* to be able to explain itself. My hope is that I can get the idea that's been there for so many years *out there* in some way, rather than it just being the subject of endless pub conversations about something I never got around to.

So... **what is Lifespan?**

*What. Is. Lifespan. Question-mark.*

The idea is to create a structured, interconnected, explorable timeline of all events, entities, and individuals. It is simultaneously personal and universal, a system to map individual experiences against the backdrop of history. It's a way to visualise how every human life, idea, or event fits into *The larger timeline of everything*.

There are some core concepts.

Every entity - people, organisations, bands, wars, governments, *all the things* - can be seen as a **span**. Spans have a start and, if they've finished, an end. Those points in time, along with other things that don't have any duration, are **atoms**[^2]

Atoms can be very precise, or a bit fuzzy, depending on what we know. I'm reliably informed that Neil Armstrong first set foot on the Moon on July 21, 1969, at 02:56:15 UTC, but we're not *quite* so sure when Charles Darwin arrived in the Galápagos Islands... it was around the 15th or 16th September 1835. For example.

As well as being bounded by them, spans can *contain* atoms, and they can have *connections* to other spans. The voyage of The Beagle is a span in its own right, but also a **subspan** of Charles Darwin's span. My children have spans, and they overlap with mine from the moment of their births. They have literal and conceptual parent-child relationships, as well as temporal relations in the sense of [James Allen’s 1983 paper](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Allen%27s_interval_algebra) on the subject. More on that another time.

Everything is a subspan of something, and ultimately we're all part of the Universal Span, which is the existence of the universe itself. The Big Bang is a particularly fuzzy atom, at the year -13.8 billion, give or take.

This way of thinking isn't exactly new, of course... as I said, people have been thinking about temporal relations for a long time (*meta*), and there are lots of [big and serious projects](https://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time/) in this area. But a way for a person to explore and interact with *all the things that have ever happened* - merging personal and historical perspectives - has always felt like something that doesn't exist, and that could.

The central type of question that Lifespan answers is the kind we ask each other all the time: "what were you doing when you were my age?" or “what was happening when that happened?” Once you realise it, you see it all the time whenever you have a conversation with someone and are trying to get to know them. It's a way to picture them and their story, like looking at a time map and seeing where you are relative to them and other things. I even used an example like this at the start of writing, didn’t I?

So what is Lifespan? Lifespan is Wikipedia built by Tralfamadorians[^1] — a collaborative, generative system where users can explore, navigate, and contribute to a representation of time.

It's probably easier if I show you. So I'm building a prototype, and you'll be able to see for yourself. It’s about time.


[^1]: Tralfamadorians are extraterrestrial beings from the works of [Kurt Vonnegut](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kurt_Vonnegut)... you should read "Slaughterhouse-Five" if you have't. They are 4-dimensional, and see all of time simultaneously.
[^2]: "An atom of time or "a-tom" ("indivisible" in Greek), refers to the smallest possible unit of time." - [Wikipedia)(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom_(time))